cancer violence aggression obesity
stress if you want to fix all your
complex problems well this is
controversial but the vast majority of
the evidence suggests that Daniel
liberman a Harvard Professor who uses
the information of our evolutionary past
to understand the Health crisis we are
in today and educate people on how to
live a long healthy life the vast
majority of us in the Western World will
die from a mismatch disease chronic
stress that's what we call a mismatch
obesity heart disease many cancers are
mismatches and it's because we know live
in a world where we're able to have
incredible levels of comfort with all
this choice for example the number one
medical complaint is back pain because
I'm sitting in this comfortable chair I
don't have to use any of the back
muscles so we develop weak backs that
don't have any endurance we know that
people who sit a lot at work but then
also sit a lot in their Leisure Time run
way more risk of disease and if you
aren't Physically Active you don't grow
as much skeleton and then when you hit
25 to 30 for a rest of your life you're
going to start losing bone oh even in
this highly sanitized World we're much
more like ly to develop allergies and
various kinds of autoimmune diseases
because our immune systems are so
unchallenged they end up accidentally
attacking us also famous studies show
that the Richer the country the higher
the rate of cancer Bangladeshi women who
mov to England their cancer rates go way
up because of diet and physical activity
and stress things that have changed in
our modern world for which we are very
poorly adapted there's a lot to take in
is there an actionable conclusion that I
can do today that is going to reduce my
chances of getting one of these
mismatched diseases yes I think there's
two the first is
quick one this is really really
fascinating to me on the back end of our
YouTube channel it says that
69.9% of you that watch this channel
frequently over the lifetime of this
channel haven't yet hit the Subscribe
button I just wanted to ask you a favor
it helps this channel so much if you
choose to just subscribe helps us scale
the guest helps us scale the production
and it makes the show bigger so if I
could ask you for one favor if you've
watched this show before and you've
enjoyed it and you like this episode
that you're currently watching could you
please hit the Subscribe button thank
you so much much and I will repay that
gesture by making sure that everything
we do here gets better and better and
better and better that is a promise I'm
willing to make you do we have a
[Music]
deal Daniel what is your job title I am
a professor of human evolutionary
biology at Harvard University and what
does that
mean it means I get to have a lot of fun
um I study uh well my department studies
how and why humans are the way we are
and we're also interested in how and why
that's relevant to to humans today uh my
particular specialty is I study the
human body I'm interested in how why the
human body is the way it is and how
that's relevant to health and disease
and I most interested most of my work is
on the evolution of human physical
activity but I'm also interested in in
diet and and and other ways in which we
use our bodies why does it matter well
because we weren't designed you know we
weren't engineered neared we evolved
right so if you understand why we are
the way we are you have to understand
that evolutionary history and and if you
want to solve problems if you want to
deal with you know big issues that we
face today obesity you know heart
disease cancer violence aggression all
of these things have an evolutionary
origin and an evolutionary origin is is
crucial to to helping us come up with
Solutions does what we eat play a role
in the sort of starting point of our
stories and how began to we I'm thinking
about farming Hunter Gathering um and
all those things because when I look at
human beings versus a lot of animals and
you talk about this in the book we Are
remarkably fragile in and inadequate in
comparison like our eyesight isn't that
great we're like super weak I think you
say that like most monkeys are stronger
than we are squirrels can run faster
than
us well I think we actually exaggerate
our fragileness and weakness to some
extent so so chimpanzees our closest
relatives um are about probably about 30
30% stronger than we are um you would
not want to arm wrestle a chimpanzee
right um and most quadrupeds um can run
way faster than we can right we are we
have this sort of story about human
evolution that it's been a sort of
Triumph of brains over braa right that
we have this we have tools and language
and and and that has enabled us to sort
of conquer you know the world and become
the dominant species and there's some
truth to that of course technology uh
language communication cooperation all
are essential part of the human success
story um but you know I think as
athletes we're pretty impressive we can
outrun most animals over long distances
so we're we're really impressive in
terms of endurance both men and women we
can throw we can kick we can do all
kinds of things that my dog can't do as
far as diet is concerned you know we're
we're the ultimate omnivores we can eat
anything um I mean most animals have
very kind of constrained diets there are
certain things they can eat most of the
things out there they cannot eat we've
managed to figure out because of of
Technology cooking food processing but
also because of the nature of our of our
digestive system we can eat just about
anything on the planet right people can
be vegans they can be you know they can
eat all meat diets they can you know
it's it's astonishing how much variety
humans can get by with um our you know
our livers can turn anything into
anything you can you can we can turn fat
into carbohydrates carbohydrates into
fat we have an incredibly astonishing
range of foods that we can consume when
we're thinking about our sort of
evolutionary history and and the hunter
gatherer tribes that still exist in the
world I think I've fallen into the Trap
of believing that all the answers we're
looking for about how to be healthy
humans in the modern world can be found
just by looking back at our hunter
gatherer
ancestors is that true that they hold
the answers to how to live a happy
healthy life well it's like everything
gets complicated right I mean to some
extent um we call that a Paleo fantasy
this idea that if you just go back to
being a hunter gatherer that you'll have
no problems right and that Hunter
gathers have no violence and they don't
get sick and you know all is well
well it's not so simple right I'll give
you one example murder we have this idea
that you know humans have become
incredibly violent since the origins of
farming right but if you actually look
at the ethnographic record Hunter
gathers are are just as violent as the
rest of us they're they're human beings
um they they they they kill for passion
they kill for greed they kill for uh you
know for that you know there's murder
there's there's Warfare among Hunter
gatherers even in in some parts of the
world yes it's true that hunter
gatherers don't have the same problems
with obesity they don't have metabolic
syndrome they don't have um they
probably don't get heart disease least
to the extent that we do there are
plenty of things that they do that are
worth um emulating but but they're not
role models in every respect and you
know what natural selection cares about
is how many offspring we have who
survive right that's the only thing
natural s cares out it's the equation of
life is food in babies out right that's
what that's what we're here for right as
far as natural selection is concerned
not happiness we're not here to be happy
we're not here to be nice we're not here
to be fulfilled or anything like that
although it's good when that happens
right we evolved to be hun gathers our
ancestors were hun gathers for millions
of years but those but the the
adaptations they have are primarily and
first and foremost about reproductive
success so we didn't evolve to eat foods
to make us healthy we evolved foods that
would increase our reproductive success
and we evolve to be healthy only to the
extent that Health promotes reproductive
success so you you can't just assume
that because our ancestors did something
it must it's it's optimal for health
it's you can it's more reasonable to
assume that that's optimal for
Reproductive success and remember it's
in those environments and in those
contexts and things have changed talking
there about what they one of the big
debates of I guess that's an ongoing
debate is whether we are evolved to eat
meet or we're meant you know we're meant
to be interesting use of words vegan an
or
vegetarians what's your perspective on
that cuz i' I've sat here with people um
who are really really passionate about
the fact that we're not supposed to
evolutionarily see how quickly I tried
to say that word because I don't know
how to say it um meant to eat meat well
that's just
nonsense I
mean humans have been humans started
eating meat about two and a half million
years ago there's no question at least
two and a half million years ago maybe
more and there was no question it played
an extremely important role in our
evolutionary history even chimpanzees
our closest Cousins eat meat
occasionally when they can they don't
get it very often uh maybe about less
than 5% of their diet is meat you know
from an evolutionary perspective we
evolved to have meat as part of our diet
but but of course you can be a human
being and not eat meat and do just fine
in fact there are some advantages
because remember we didn't evolve to be
healthy so just because our ancestors
ate meat or didn't eat meat doesn't mean
that's optimal for health today right
it's that's that's very sort of
impoverished way of thinking it's just
it's just illogical right um You our
ancestors didn't evolve to to to read so
should we not read reading is only a few
thousand years old right so it it
doesn't you know that's just not the
right way to think about about how to
use evolutionary theory and data the the
fact of the matter is that we evolved to
eat just about everything we are the
ultimate omnivores it's astonishing the
range of foods that we eat Hunter gather
is you know a typical Hunter Gather in
in the like for example there's data
from the Kalahari I think they eat about
uh like 800 different kinds of plants
many different kinds of animals right
and that's just the Kalahari humans
moved over the last you know few hundred
thousand years to pretty much every
corner of the planet and in every part
of the world they found foods to eat
humans live in the Arctic where there's
almost nothing but meat to eat in many
seasons and you know where you you get
plant food in the Arctic in the winter
by eating the contents of the intestines
of of the animals that they they they
hunt right
um and people evolved to live by by
oceans and and and fish and and die for
shellfish and you know eat shellfish I
mean it's that they live in in in
rainforests and eat bugs and you know
birds and monkeys I mean everywhere you
go on the planet people figured out to
eat various kinds of foods and one of
the ways we became so omnivorous is that
in addition to having incredibly
flexible digestive system we also have
technology to to Pro process our food so
by cooking our food by fermenting our
food by grinding cooking cutting it up
we've been able to essentially adapt
ourselves to an astonishing range of
environments hence an astonishing range
of foods and so so so now tell me like
what diet are we evolved to eat right
it's it's an impossible question to
answer is there a point in our history
where we learn how to hunt and gather
and was that the point where we started
really eating more Meats yes
so well first of all it probably wasn't
like a you know a a day you know you
know lightning bolt came down from the
sky and all of a sudden bam you know so
we we figured how to hunt U after all
our ape cousins uh will hunt when they
can but as soon as we became bipeds
which is probably around seven million
years ago walk on two feet right we we
became slow right you know chimpanzees
when they run can Gallop essentially on
four legs right and and that and they
can be really fast they can't run
distances but boy are they amazingly
fast and they can climb up trees like
like no human can around 7 million years
ago when we split from the chimpanzee
lineage it looks like we became you
know obligatory two-legged bipedal
creatures and as when you have only two
legs you can only run half as fast as
when you can have four legs it's like
having a cylinder car with half the
number of cylinders right you you know
you can just produce less power right
and so our early ancestors must have
been slow there's no way they could have
run that fast fast and certainly not
fast enough to be great hunters so I
suspect that compared to chimpanzees
they were probably poor Hunters because
they couldn't run down creatures the way
chimpanzees could right so probably for
a few million years meat was probably
rare in the diet but then we begin to
see starting around you know around
three million years ago maybe a little
bit older stone tools in the
archaeological record we find bones with
some cut marks on them and starting
around you know 2.5 2.6 million years
ago we have archaeological sites with
with bones of animals with cut marks on
them stone tools and those animals were
clearly butchered and by 2 million years
ago we have clear evidence that humans
were were were actually hunting you know
we have we have clear evidence that
these animals weren't just scavenged
they were definitely hunted so that
means that sometime between around three
and two million years ago hunting became
part of our ancestors repertoire they're
also making tools they must have been
cooperating uh they probably had some
form of communication or whatever we
don't know exactly what it's like and
they're probably eating a wide range of
foods including including what we call
extractive foraging so they're they're
eating tubers underground storage organs
right so instead of just plucking
berries off plants you know they're
they're actually finding high quality
foods that you have to dig for right
under the ground right it's like just
think about a potato it stores its
energy underground so there's a these
are rich sources of food but you have to
be able to dig for them and find them
right so this combination of extractive
foraging so not just not just plucking
leaves or berries off plants but finding
high quality resources hunting
cooperation tool making and Tool using
all together that's the hunter gatherer
way of life right and that emerged
sometime again between three and two
million years ago and that was
transformative that's the that's really
I think one of the most
important shifts that occurred in human
evolution and that's also incidentally
when we see this shift in our bodies
right when we when we going from being
more ESS more apik like australopiths
which had short legs and long arms and
they have small brains and you know
they're they're not Apes but they're but
they're more
apik to basically bodies that are more
or less like yours and mine so we have a
a fossil called uh the tur boy his real
name is naria kame he's from the west
side of Lake turana Northern Kenya he's
a homus uh who was probably about 8
years old when he died and you know from
the neck down he's basically like you
and me um his he's his his head is not
quite like ours but he's has a big brain
not as big as ours he has a doesn't have
a snout like a like a like an
australopith he's got a vertical face uh
he's got teeth that are basically like
yours and mine he's basically very you
know on that path towards being a human
and so hunting and Gathering and the
genus homo kind of come together and
that was I think one of the most
important major shifts that occurred in
our Evolution maybe the most important
actually more important than even the
evolution of our own species and that
allowed us to to become good hunter
gatherers so we have this nose that
sticks out of our face whereas like a
lot of our cousins look more like
Voldemort like they kind of have the
invert and that's a sign that of when we
became hunter gatherers right yeah so
that external nose right so a chimpanzee
has a flat nose like a dog right and
that external nose that you and I have
which is of course fantastic for holding
our glasses right well you don't have
glasses not yet at least um uh is um is
a oh we think it's a kind of a
humidifier so when air goes into our
nose it has to go through a little
nostril so it's a little what's called a
Venturi throat so it it goes through a
very narrow um bore and then into a a
larger space that has to turn a right
angle to get into the inside of our nose
and then has to turn another angle to
get down into our that pipe we call that
the FX that brings air to the down to
our lungs and all those twists and turns
and and changes in diameter cause the
air to be more turbulent so the air
instead of flowing in a kind of a you
know straight right um become it has
these V vortices it's it's got all kinds
of currents and when that happens that
means that the air has more contact with
the the the the mucous membranes in our
in our nasal cavity so it can pick up
moisture on the way in pick up heat on
the way in so our lungs are um don't get
dried out and on the way out it can
recapture that moisture so that we don't
um we don't lose that U moisture when
we're um when we're walking or for that
matter running so um if you on a really
cold day you can do a simple experiment
right when it's below freezing if you
breathe out right you see all that steam
coming out do the same thing breathe out
through your nose you'll see a lot less
Steam and that's evidence of this this
ability of our of our of our noses to
trap air um and that's because of this
external nose so so that happens around
2 million years ago or so um we can see
that cuz on the in the fossils we can
see the the margin of the nose and you
can see that it's lipped out it's what
we call inverted right it sticks out and
that's evidence that we had these
cartilages that sticked out suuck out
and and gave us our modern nose so so if
yeah if you went two million years ago
and you met an your your ancient
ancestors they would have had a nice
schn does what does this say about how
we breathe today because of there's been
a huge conversation I think over the
last couple years about breathing and
Bre breath exercises and mouth breathing
in particular um I've had people on this
show like James Nester who talks about
how there's a lot of disease happening
because we've kind of by habit become
mouth breathers when we
run um but also so many people seem to
be having a lot of problems with their
sleep my girlfriend for example she uses
nasal strips when she sleeps to try and
like open up her Airways and I she think
she's going to have to have an operation
but we've even got people in our team
that are seems like everyone's nose is
what do they call it when it's the theid
deviated septum deviated septum seems
like everyone's struggling with this at
the moment yeah I have to say I'm a
little skeptical of some of these
arguments the idea that you can fix all
your health problems by just breathing
through your nose um look breathing is
obviously very important but um but the
idea that for example when you run you
should only breathe out through your
nose that's just that's just silly um uh
that's just not true we evolve to
breathe out of our mouth when we run
we're the only species that does that
actually because it's an way to dump
heat when you're running you're
generating huge amounts of heat you have
to dump it or you're going to overheat
um and you you you breathe out through
your mouth for that reason right to to
kind of um to get the heat out of there
right breathing through your nose would
be maladaptive and no Elite runner on
the planet breathes out through their
nose when they're when they're running
um I'm not sure where that came from and
I just like to see more data to support
some of these arguments about nasal
breathing I'd like to see data to
support the the effectiveness of those
of those nasal strips uh sure breathing
is important there are better and worse
ways to breathe you know we're always
looking for Simple Solutions right to
complex problems and the idea that
somehow fixing your breathing is going
to prevent you from having a wide range
of diseases is um not true and people
who have sleep apnea which is a serious
issue um uh that's usually caused by
well it's caused by a variety of things
of course a deviated septum might be one
of them obesity can cause it there's a
number of other problems and of course
once that occurs um you know again you
want to treat the cause not the symptom
right so the best way to treat the cause
of the apnea is not to put a piece of
tape on your nose it's to it's to it's
to find the underlying cause by why
that's happening in the first place and
solve that and deal with that and
sweating sort of correlated to that turn
in the the fork in the road in our sort
of hunter gatherer history because
monkeys and even my dog Pablo he doesn't
seem to sweat from anywhere other than
his mouth I guess it seems like he's his
panting is his way exactly exactly so
the way in which most animals cool down
is by penting right they they breathe uh
through their mouth or their nose right
and there's there's uh air passes over
these mucus membranes on the on the in
the nose and the mouth and and and um
and what happens is that the air uh by
passing that air over the tongue or
whatever causes uh you get evapor
transpiration so evaporation so the air
the the the moisture in that goes from a
liquid to a gas phase right and that of
course costs energy so because energy is
because of conservation of energy that
means that for every I think milliliter
of oxy of of water that goes that goes
from wa water to gas I think it's 561
calories calories of the small CA and
that so that causes the tongue or the
surface of the nose to cool and then
there's blood right behind that blood
blood in the tongue thing if you cut
your tongue it's really bloody right if
you cut your nose right it's a lot of
blood there's a huge huge amount of
vasculature in there all these arteries
and veins right so that you cool then
the blood that's just below the surface
of the tongue and in the nose and then
that cools down your body right so
that's so panting is how animals cool or
you can even watch a lizard a lizzard
also does what's called G pumping it'll
it'll actually you know that's how it
cools itself down watch a a lizard will
run and then it'll it'll basically pent
and then it'll run again and it'll pant
and it'll run again because it's prevent
itself from overheating right now what
we did is we've we have uh sweat glands
so most animals have there's two kinds
of glands right there's one's called
aicon glands those are the glands we
have in our you know armpits and around
our genitals Etc or in our ears they
produce waxy sort of fatty substances
right there's the ones that smell or or
ear wax that protects our ear so all
most mammals have those aican glands
ecran glands are watery glands and most
mammals have them just on their palms
their paws and their feet right m so
that they can just think about when you
wet your finger you can turn a piece of
page right it gives you it gives you
more grip on something so when you're
trying to escape from a predator
sweating on your hands will help you run
up that
tree if you're a mouse or something like
that a rodent so most mammals have ecran
glands just on their palms but in
monkeys uh they started to evolve having
some sweat glands on their bodies but
not many and so chimpanzees monkeys have
some ecran glands on their bodies but
what we've done is we've increased that
by an order of magnitude we have like 10
times the number uh the 10 times the
density of Ean glands the monkeys and
chimpanzees and we lost our fur so and
of course fur prevents air
from from you from convection of air
next to the Skin So when you sweat on
your skin and you don't have fur the uh
you you can have evaporation of of
moisture and then and then air takes
that away quickly so you can keep
evaporating moisture and then you can
cool your body so we've effectively
turned our entire bodies into a tongue
essentially and so we can dump amazing
amounts of heat when we're physically
active in hot environments and that was
obviously important for ancestors uh
when they're hunting right we have a
huge Advantage In the Heat of the day
because we can not only we good at
running for All For You know because of
our legs and our muscles and Archilles
tendon and all these adaptations we have
for running but we also have this
incredible therm regulatory ability to
dump heat which the animal we're chasing
does not have and we can we can we can
they'll die of heat stroke but we don't
know when that happened and it's
possible that um that our stopi
ancestors before before hunting started
because remember they're two-legged
creatures right and they're not um
they're not very
fast so maybe in the middle of the day
when when it was really um you know hot
that was the best time for them to go
out and get food because that's the time
of day when carnivores that would love
to chase them right if I'm a carnivore
and I want to am I going to eat a
gazelle or an australopith right aopi is
going to be half the speed of the
gazelle that's easy pickings right so
I'm going to go for an australopith so
maybe our early ancestors forged in the
middle of the day when it was really hot
so that because they because they were
too slow to run away from carnivores and
maybe that was an adaptation and so the
ability to to to dump heat effectively
might have been really important for
them so it's possible we just don't know
that sweating actually came before
hunting it's just simply at this point
we don't because skin doesn't Preserve
in the fossil record we just don't yet
know when that happened what about a big
brain did that come before hunting or is
that a a product of the fact that we
started hunting it looks like more the
latter right
so are chimpanzees have brains you know
typical chimpanzee might have about a
400 cubic centimeter brain like 400
grams think about it in grams right
typical human has a brain that's like
1,400 gram so you know really like three
to four times the size of a chimpanzee's
brain for about five million years in
our evolutionary history so the earliest
hominins hominin is the term for
creature more closely related to us than
a chimp right so the earliest hominins
plus you know these australopiths like
Lucy they had brains that got up into
the 500 gram range rarely maybe
sometimes 600 but not that much
starting around two two million years
ago brain size just starts to shoot up
if you look on a graph right and that's
of course around the time we started
hunting but it's but it's really the
time we have hunting and Gathering and
so I think it's the whole system it's
it's not just meat although meat must
have been an important component of it
but the whole hunting and Gathering
system is really a way to get more
energy right because you're you're
you're processing your food so you're
getting more energy because you're
cooking your food or you're processing
it in various ways you're you're
cooperating you're you're you're you're
you're getting new sources of food such
as meat and Marrow and brains and
whatever all of that together means that
more energy is available and when more
energy is available then there's less of
a constraint on brain size because
brains are expensive just right now you
and I we're sitting right we're not
really doing much of anything other than
talking but one out of every five of our
breaths is to pay for our brain our
brain is using 20% of our metabolism
right and so to have a really big brain
means you have to have a lot of energy
available to you and so so most animals
can't afford big brains because they
don't have enough energy right with
hunting and Gathering you get more
energy more energy means selection can
now you know this the con the
constraints on having a big brain are
now released now you can get selection
for a larger brain so individuals with
bigger brains might have had some
advantage over individuals with smaller
brains maybe they were better at doing
this that or the other and so you get
selection for larger and larger brain
sizes and it really acceler Ates up
until you know well it continues up
until a few hundred thousand years ago
when essentially brains reached
basically modern size and then you get
fat because you have so much energy and
you have such a big brain it's it's all
about energy but that kind of makes
sense doesn't it you store more energy
and then we started to
get fat well fat is really important for
a number of reasons and one of them is
having a big brain so um you know a
human infant when it's born it's brain
is consuming half its metabolic energy
like when when a kid is born 50% of the
of the of the energy it's spending is
just to pay for its brain it's a brain
on a little body basically right and um
and of course you can't stop feeding a
brain brains require energy constantly
right brains don't store energy they
need a constant supply of glucose or or
Ketone bodies which you can use as when
you don't have sugar available to you
right you can get those from fats right
right so infants human infants are born
unusually fat guy named Chris kazawa
showed that you know we know that a
human baby when it's born is about 15%
body fat way more than any other species
right and that brain that all that fat
is really kind of an like money in the
bank to make sure that that brain always
has energy available to it and
furthermore he had published a really
cool paper a few years ago which showed
that when uh an infant's brain is
growing right in the first few years of
life the when it's growing really fast
that's when its body fat levels are
going down and when it's storing a lot
of fat that's when its brain isn't
growing very much so there's a tradeoff
in energy between fat and brains as
we're growing so so big brains and fat
bodies are intimately connected so we
want to make sure our babies are fat a
fat baby is an essential fundamental
human adaptation and and the body fat
that we have I mean a typical human has
much more body fat than than than than
most most animals most primates have
about four or 5% body fat most mammals
have about four or five% body fat
whereas a skinny human has maybe 10 to
25% body fat right so that body fat is
not only important for brains but it's
also important for our reproduction
because a typical mother nursing for
example right uh Hunter gathers will
nurse for about three years nursing is
really expensive it costs about 600
calories a day to produce breast
milk now imagine you're a hunter gather
and there's not a lot of food around
right you're in what we call negative
energy balance you're not getting as
much food in as you're spending right
you can't just stop nursing you're
infant is still going to require that
energy so you draw down on your fat
reserves right so having all that fat
which goes up and down and up and down
from season to season you store more fat
in the Good Seasons you use that up in
the Bad seasons those are fundamental
adaptations to keep us Physically Active
to enable us to reproduce the way we do
to pay for our big brains they're
they're part of you know that that you
know our our kind of relatively high
level of fat and our our predisposition
to store fat is fundamental to our
species we wouldn't be here if we if we
didn't have all that fat and I guess
this is why dieting is so hard right
because well we never evolved to diet we
evolved to put that fat on we did evolve
of course to use it when we needed it
right but we never evolved um to to to
get rid of fat it was just there was
never you know in an absence of obesity
there wouldn't be selection for for that
kind of physiological system to lose fat
without needing it because when we try
and diet it does feel like our body is
somewhat against us when I hear about
like sugar cravings and you know many
people have told me that if you the
reason why diets don't work is because
your body's trying to basically defend
the weight that you're at because that
used to mean your your survival that's
right um we call that a starvation
response right so when you go into
negative energy balance which is what a
diet is right you're spending more
energy than you're using and you're
taking in your body goes into a a
starvation response your cortisol levels
go up for example right it's a it's a
it's an emergency right it's like it's a
cortisol is our stress hormone stress
doesn't cause cortisol to go up cortisol
goes up when we are stressed and it
makes energy available to us and one of
the things that cortisol does is it
makes us hungry right when you're really
stressed at night right studying for an
exam of one of my students right they
get you know hunger you know they get
sugar Cravings right because they're
cortisol levels because they're stress
because I'm going to give them an
examine the next day goes up and then
they they want energy right cortisol
also makes you store fat in visceral
deposit so so so belly fat which is
which is you know concerning right it's
a it's a useful kind of fat right
because the fat that we store in and
around our abdomen is is very hormone
sensitive it's it's got lots of blood
vessels so that fat is a great energy
Supply when you're you know you're
physically active right when I when I
want run running around Central Park
this morning right I was burning some of
my belly fat but when cortisol levels go
up that's like it also directs us to B
deposit fat in those stores right and
the problem with those stores is that um
they're also very inflammatory so when
those fat cells get too large and they
swell they become
dysfunctional and they cause
inflammation they cause chronic systemic
inflammation which is just ruinous for
our health it causes diabetes and
Alzheimer's and you know heart disease
all kinds of diseases that um that
pretty much every major disease that
we're worried about the mismatch
diseases that we often talk about are
you know many of them are are stress are
inflammation related and and and and
that that's why we're con people are
concerned about excess uh adiposity
excess fat because excess fat causes
inflammation so that means that people
that are more stressed and more likely
to have belly fat correct yes that's
true so so that's one of the reasons why
stress is you know a risk factor for so
many diseases psychosocial stress is a
is a it has pernicious effects and
that's why you know racism
discrimination all those all those
factors that can Elevate stress
commuting um um have negative Health
consequences because it it causes us to
our cortisol levels to go up it causes
our us to us to put fat in the wrong
places it has a cortisol also turns your
immune system down
cortisol has all kinds of you know
negative effects when it's when it's
longterm and persistently
high it's often been said that if you
lose too much weight for example if a
woman loses too much weight then her
menstrual cycle will stop and I was
thinking about this from an evolutionary
perspective and you were saying how you
know fat is essentially evidence of our
survival so in some ways is that our if
that is true then is that our body
basically sto our menstrual cycle to
conserve energy basically if you could
think about it like our body saying to
us we don't have the energy to have kids
right now you are absolutely right so
it's a little bit comp more complicated
than that but but you you basically got
it right so there's two things first of
all fat is not just an energy store fat
is also an organ right fat fat produces
hormones we produce your fat produces a
hormone called leptin which affects
appetite but it also produces um
estrogen so so uh when women have very
low levels of body fat their estrogen
levels decline um and they don't produce
enough estrogen to have effective
menstrual cycles um so they become
what's called amenic am Menara is is a
is a just a fancy medical term for for
um U for loss of sort of normal cycling
it's been shown by many researchers a
former professor of mine Peter Ellison
and there other researchers around the
world a woman named GNA jensa and Poland
others have shown that you know our
bodies are Inc incredibly sensitive to
energy availability for example women
who are dieting they may have plenty of
body fat but when they're dieting which
means they're going to negative energy
balance levels of progesterone which is
a very important hormone for the
menstrual cycle progesterone is produced
in the second half of the menstrual
cycle and it maintains the the uterine
lining so you can have implantation
progesterone levels plummet they go down
by you know 50% during the ludal phase
that second half of the menstrual cycle
um thereby decreasing um their ability
to conceive um uh women who are very
Physically Active also there's a
decrease in the amount of progesterone
again during the second half of the
menstrual cycle a flip way of thinking
about it though is that because remember
what we evolved to do is to have as many
offspring as possible and so our bodies
also another way of thinking about this
also is that uh whenever there's extra
energy available the body you know it's
an adaptation to say hey let's use that
energy for reproduction so let's
increase estrogen levels let's increase
progesterone levels so we can increase
our our facundity increase our fertility
so there's a bit of a a balancing act
yes it's a bit of a balancing act so to
so obviously you know exercise is not
bad for women who are trying to conceive
and and and women who are but women who
are sedentary and aren't exercising have
high levels of Esten progesterone and
that may that's may be one of the
reasons why physical activity decreases
the risk of breast cancer so much so
women who are Physically Active have
like a 30 to 50% lower rate of breast
cancer and a lot of that part of that
has to do with the fact that their
hormone levels are more normal because
sedentary women have abnormally high
levels but nonetheless it's the the
important point from what you asked is
that our the body is incredibly
sensitive to energy right and so it
knows that when energy levels are low
when you're losing fat this is not a
good good time to invest because think
about it pregnancy lasts N9 months it's
incredibly expensive then you're going
to be spending months later nursing
which is also very expensive maybe this
is not a good time to invest let's wait
until times are better then you know
that this is a this is a better use of
your of your of you know a better time
to get pregnant a better you're can have
a much more likely positive outcome I
was thinking about what you were saying
through the lens of stress as well
because stress releases cortisol and if
someone is incredibly stressed I imagine
they're going to have trouble with
fertility as well probably for the same
reason I guess it's like a line was
running at you this is not a good time
to have it cortisol cortisol one of the
things that cortisol does is it turns
down everything that you don't need to
do at that moment in time right because
we evolve to elevate cortisol acutely
you know for short bursts when you know
when when the lion comes into the room
right um but but not over very very long
periods of time so you know when when
when the lion comes into the this is not
a time to reproduce it's not a time to
spend energy on your immune system it's
not a time to do all kinds of stuff
right just run right make energy
available but situations where you have
persistently high levels of cortisol
chronic stress chronic stress that's
what we call a mismatch right mismatches
are conditions that um for which our
bodies did not evolve right these are
novel environmental conditions um for
which we are inadequately or imperfectly
adapted for and that they cause the vast
maj majority of the diseases and
problems that we we encounter today and
you know taking exams is is a mismatch
um having you know you know
discrimination racism poverty um these
are you know any all those sorts of
things that elevate our cortisol levels
for long periods of time those are
mismatches you know in fact the vast
majority of the diseases that people
have today um apart from some infectious
diseases but the vast majority even of
infectious diseases are mismatches
because they come from humans spending
more time with animals and like all all
the a lot of the diseases that we you
know infectious diseases that we have
actually are diseases that jumped over
from the animal world to to humans
tuberculosis for example right that's a
disease that Hunter gathers didn't get
it's a it it came after farming the vast
majority of diseases I would say so yeah
I mean heart disease I mean look we when
we look around the world and look at
people who don't live in you know modern
Western Lifestyles they they heart
diseas is is rare to non existent
there's a wonderful study of a of a
group of people in the am in Amazon
called the
chiman there these are horticulturalist
foragers right they have there's like no
evidence whatsoever of any coronary
heart disease in these people some of
the populations that we've studied no no
increase in blood pressure in fact back
in the 1970s some of the first studies
that were ever done on the health of
Hunter gathers found that 80-year-old
hunter gatherers in the Kalahari had the
same blood pressure as 20-year-old
hunter gatherers in the Kalahari where
and they compared them to to to to to
English um people and you know londoners
at the same time and of course by the
time you're 70 or 80 in London almost
everybody's hypertensive right this is
this is a this is because of diet and
physical activity and and probably also
stress um these are these are these are
things that have changed in our modern
world for which we are very poorly
adapted no
diabetes if it exists nobody's diagnosed
it it's probably incred rare but even a
few Generations ago diabetes was rare I
mean diabetes is the world's fastest
growing disease where I work in Kenya um
in in the area around the town city
called
eldoret when I first started working
there gosh long time ago you know you
drive into the city then you'd be an
eldoret now as you drive into the city
you pass by all these diabetes clinics
they they weren't there before that's
because diabetes is rising in in in
Africa
to at incredibly rapid
rates which you know isn't that
surprising because diabetes in places
like the United States and England are
incredibly common about something like
12% of Americans have diabetes now you
said that this mismatch is responsible
for most diseases doesn't that therefore
mean that I'm most likely to die from a
mismatch disease in my life yes okay yes
the vast majority of us in in the
Western World will die from a mismatch
disease the number one disease in the
world today that kills more people than
anybody anything else is is heart
disease and as far as we're you know
heart diseas is kills at least about a
third of us cancer is number two cancers
of course are ancient disease so not all
cancers are mismatched disease but many
cancers are mismatches right breast
cancer which is much more common in
Western populations than in non-western
populations um but heart disease you
know is essentially as far as we're
concerned non-existent until fairly
recently and now it's killing about 33%
of us 30 you said a third right yes
that's crazy so so crazy that's the bad
news right but the good news is because
they're mismatch diseases they're not
they're not inevitable right we
shouldn't just say all right heart
disease kills a third of us let's just
um because the the amazing thing about
heart disease is that diet and exercise
can prevent a large percentage if not
almost the almost all of them right if
people who live in environments where
they don't eat obesogenic diets diets
that are that make people overweight
diets that lead to metabolic syndrome
diets that are uh that are atherogenic
that cause a atherosclerosis right
people who are Physically Active um and
stress is also an important role plays a
role in heart disease don't smoke um
have vastly lower rates of heart disease
to the extent that it's you know this is
a this is a this is a disease that
doesn't have to exist you said you're
writing a book about diet and food yes
why the story of how the diets that we
eat today and and uh is is actually a
really fascinating story but also um
because I think that we um if we take a
more evolutionary approach to diet um we
can I think do much better to thinking
about you know help people make choices
I mean one important point to make is
that you know today like when we finish
this interview I'm going to go home and
my wife and I are going to and my
daughter and my mother-in-law are going
to try to decide what we're going to
have for dinner tonight right and we can
like we can go we can eat whatever we
want right we can go to the supermarket
and there's like you name it right here
in New York the really is you name it
right we can we can go out to
restaurants we can have Chinese or food
or Japanese food or American food or
French food whatever right we have we
have incredible choices to us for most
of human evolution history people never
chose what they ate ever right they ate
what was available to them and now with
all this choice we comes comes comes bad
choices right and so uh I would like to
help people figure out how not only
realize that these choices that we have
to make are we're not really evolved to
do but also how to better understand
what those choices are and what the
complexities are of of them because
there are no there there's no such thing
as a free lunch right every every choice
that you make has Alternatives and
alternative consequences and and I think
people oversimplified diet people come
up with simple ideas how you know just
do this just be a vegan just be a this
just be a that um there are no perfect
answers do you think in some ways that
our culture moved so much faster than
our biology in a sense because we're
like super sedentary now we just sit all
day we have these screens that bring us
our food um the food is processed and is
this part of what's causing this sort of
misalignment all these Mis mismatch
diseases as you call them is absolutely
because evolution by natural selection
occurs really slowly right every
generation people with genes that have
given them adaptations they're better
able to handle a particular
environmental context do better than the
Next Generation so slowly slowly
slowly Generation by generation you get
change right and that's true for every
animal right um mismatch is not unique
to humans right as environments change
some animals are better adapted to that
environment than other animals and
though those animals are going to be
more likely to pass those genes onto
their offspring so mismatches are part
of a natural selection every species as
environments change is subject to
mismatch or as they move into new
environments the difference with humans
is that we have culture and culture has
caused an acceleration of environmental
change right think about I mean just
today right I have now a in my pocket a
a computer right that I didn't have a
few you know decades a AG go right um we
have internet and email and all kinds of
things right just the last few decades
the world has changed amazingly just
think about the last few Generations the
last few hundred years the last few
thousand years so cultural evolution is
so powerful and so rapid it's so fast
it's so transformative that we have made
our world so F vastly and rapidly
different that our bodies cannot
possibly keep up in terms of our biology
it's this mismatch it's this difference
between evolutionary biological change
and cultural change that has heightened
the kinds of mismatches that we exist
and then guess what we do right so we
let's say we I'll give a very simple
example right until recently nobody read
right and nobody spent a lot of time
indoors and so myopia used to be
extremely unusual right what's that
myopia is having is being nearsighted
okay so if you go to like there's a
famous study where they looked in in in
Inuit populations right in Alaska and
they looked at grandparents and
grandchildren the grandparents all had
perfect vision and the grandchildren all
need glasses or at least a large
percentage of like 30% of them right in
various parts of the world the the
number of people who are are nearsighted
has gone up in some parts of the world
it's 50% and in America and England it's
probably about 30% of us need glasses
but this is all recent um the in fact
the first study of this was done on the
Queen's guards you know the actually now
they're the king's guards right so you
know those those they have the bare skin
hats I don't know what kind of fur it is
on their head anyway they're the ones
who stand in front of imp Palace right
there was a study done in the in the
early 1800s which showed that um it was
the officers who had a higher percentage
like a large number of the officers had
to wear glasses but the the the foot
soldiers were all fine um and there was
something about it right that that about
the officers and then people started
studying them around the world and and
then initially it was thought to be
reading and now we know from more
careful studies is that's really
spending a lot of time indoors when
you're young that causes myopia so we
never evolved to do that right so we're
more prone to myopia but it's not a big
deal because guess what we just go to
the optician and we get glasses and we
can deal with it and you know it's not
doesn't really have really any major
effect on our on our on our health or
our longevity our ability to find a mate
Etc we all do just fine can we undo it
well here's the thing I mean we're what
we're doing in no myopia you you can get
lasic surgery and there are some things
you can do very expensive most people
can't afford it right but the point is
that we're treating the symt with when
you get glasses you're treating the
symptom not the Cause right but it's
okay right because it's just glasses
right the problem is that for many
mismatch diseases right when we are
still we're treating the symptoms rather
than the causes right so cancer cancer
right or or or many forms of heart
disease right you don't see a doctor in
our in our in our medical system until
you get sick right and then you get
pills to lower your blood pressure and
pills to lower your cholesterol Etc but
but these aren't well those some of them
can be preventative but but um but to a
large extent most of Medical Treatments
are treating the symptoms diseases after
they occur and I'm of course we should
do that we should alleviate pain we
should alleviate suffering we should try
to decrease people from you know dying
from all kinds of diseases but wouldn't
it be better if we actually prevented
those diseases in the first place right
we would have a much more effective
medical system so what we're causing in
my opinion kind of a new form of
evolution I call this dis Evolution
where by we're treating the symptoms of
mismatch diseases thereby enabling those
diseases to remain prevalent right and
if some cases get worse because because
we can now cope with them right so
people now get diabetes we give them
metformin or whatever various kinds of
drugs they get they get heart disease we
give them various you you know pills to
kind of keep them going they get myopia
we give them
glasses all of these are are are are
things we should do but wouldn't it be
better if we prevented people from
getting heart disease in the first place
right because this is one of the big
questions I always have with Evolution
and when we're talking about our
evolutionary history is is are we still
evolving and from what you said there it
sounds like we in a way we are but it
doesn't sound good it sounds as you say
de Evolution sounds like we're in some
ways disolution disolution yeah I mean I
mean there is there is a little bit of
selection going on I mean you can't stop
s it's like gravity it happens but it's
slow what we eat and how we eat um I
think it was James Nester that said the
way we chew impacts what our face looks
like when we become adults if a baby's
chewing lots of soft foods when they
grow up they're going to have like a
small jaw yeah that's research I did
actually oh really I think you cited
you um yeah so so how you your chewing
affects the the shape of your you know
how your your jaw grows um and so it is
true that we have smaller Jaws today
than we used to the good news is it's
not that bad right doesn't really cause
that much you maybe your teeth are more
likely to have malocclusions Etc but you
know you can but we can go to the
orthodontist and have our third MERS
extracted Etc I mean we can we can cope
with that right it's not um it's that's
not the worst thing right of course he
thinks that it causes us to breathe
through our mouths and all that sort of
stuff but it's not the kind of
disastrous sort of um mismatch that
occurs from say you know uh well this is
controversial but um the evidence you
know the vast majority of the evidence
suggests that if you eat a lot of sugar
and you eat a lot of saturated fat
you're more likely to get heart disease
you're more likely to get plaques in
your arteries right if you don't aren't
Physically Active you're you know do
exercise or or physical activity your
your blood vessels start stiffening and
you start becoming hypertensive right uh
these are all um these are all aspects
of our environment that um that we we
have the potential to to to control
better and to prevent disease do you
think we've got into a bit of a bad
habit as a society of just throwing a
pill at the problem yes I mean that's
that's the fundamental argue argument of
making about dis Evolution that that you
know it's just it's expedient to treat
the symptoms of a problem rather than
its cause what's the problem with that
well
because number of reasons one is it's
isn't the the best disease is the one
that you never get in the first place so
so we can keep people alive once they
get heart disease we can keep people
alive once they get arthritis we can
keep people alive once they get all
kinds of diseases but they but their but
their quality of life goes down and of
course we pay for it we pay for it out
the nose right it's something like 70
80% of the time when somebody goes into
a doctor's office that's for a
preventable disease 70 80% of the time
right that's a an astonishing amount of
money that we spend in our medical
system on essentially mismatch diseases
it's bankrupting us but it's also
causing misery and
um it differentially affects people of
of low income and people who are of
suffer from
discrimination um I mean look in the
United States right who gets the chance
to exercise and eat you know fresh
vegetables and you know high quality
foods and nonprocessed Foods it's it's
wealthy people right so it's also it's
just unfair and unjust you mentioned
cancer and in what way and how do we
know if that's a mismatch disease well
cancer is not completely a mismatch
disease I mean you know all species that
are multicellular get cancer cancer is a
is essentially a disease of evolution
going wrong right natural selection
going wrong right so instead of you know
when you have many different kinds of
cells in your body when a cell becomes
essentially selfish and starts to
outcompete other cells because of
mutations it gets that's a cancer right
so cancer is an outcome of
multicellularity and dinosaurs got
cancer right we have evidence for bone
cancer and dinosaurs
um so it's we're never going to get rid
of cancer
completely but we also know that cancer
is very much a disease of energy right
when when people move to high energy
environments they're much more likely to
get cancer more food eating more more
food physical inactivity is a major risk
factor for cancer um insulin for example
high levels of insulin insulin you know
promotes um you know anything that
promotes mitogenesis you know which is
mutation you know cells to divide um um
is going to increase rates of cancer um
also anything that increases the rate of
of U you know a lot of the cells that
get cancer are cells in our bodies that
interact with the outside world so our
lungs our guts you know our colons or
you know things from the outside world
come into contact with them skin exactly
those are cells that often get cancer so
when we have carcinus you know poisonous
toxic compounds in our environment those
can Elevate levels of canc cancer so
smoking car pollution etc those can
cause cancer but also having lots of
energy so we talked earlier about when
women are physically inactive their
their their hormone levels shoot up
right because the body says ha more
energy let's spend it on reproduction
right and there's a trade-off there more
the higher levels of estrogen
progesterone increase the rate of of
breast cancers that that
occur because because they cause more
more turnover in those cells in the in
breast tissue and that's that's why the
those cancer rates are higher so you can
there's famous studies which show that
you look at women from Bangladesh who
live in Bangladesh women from Bangladesh
who moov to England or Bangladeshi women
who are born in England and live in
England wherever you no matter how you
how you look at it Bangladeshi women who
moved to England their cancer rates go
way up the difference a major difference
is energy you know the diet that they
have the physical activity levels they
have they're eating more they put more
we cancer rates just shoot up canc so if
you actually plot GDP of countries
against cancer rates it's almost nearly
straight
line the Richer the country the higher
the rate of cancer what about hunter
gatherer women did they have less um
ovarian cancer o that's a hard thing to
measure because diagnosing cancer
requires some sophisticated technology
and to my knowledge nobody's ever done
careful studies of cancer rates among
Hunter gathers um but most of us are
pretty convinced that cancer rates are
much much much lower among Hunter
gathers but again also the the
population sizes are tiny so you can't
really get very large samples the amount
of menstrual cycles you have is major
factor right so I believe hope I get the
numbers right typical woman today who
goes through her entire reproductive
lifespan will have something like 500
menstrual cycles because of birth
control and um um and smaller families
it says 350 to 400 in your book is that
what it says okay thank you okay um it's
a it's it's in the hundreds right
typical Hunter gather is going to have
something like 50 50 yeah in her entire
life Wow and every time you go through a
menstrual cycle your your body is being
exposed to high levels of these hormones
right birth control um and sort of
Modern Family Planning which you know
I'm not obviously
um opposed to it but it is another
factor that has probably elevated rates
of breast cancer I didn't I never knew
that I never knew that having more
Cycles reduced your sure because each
every cycle involves you know surges of
hormones that's what causes the
cycle first you have an estrogen surge
then you have a progesterone and an
estrogen surge of course that's that's
what happens across the menstrual cycle
and hunter gatherer women would have
been pregnant more often more of their
life well yeah they a typical what we
call a natural fertility population a
population that doesn't use birth
control women are most of the time
pregnant or nursing and they go through
short periods when they um are doing
neither and then get pregnant again so
so the number of and and you don't of
course have menstrual cycles when you're
pregnant and you're generally don't have
menual Cycles when you're nursing until
again it's your energy level so so
because nursing costs so much energy
that high energy demand of nursing
suppresses ovarian function so and so so
so nursing women are often amoric
they're not cycling and that's not just
ovarian cancer that's breast cancer as
well that's yeah it's you know you any
any any cells that are sensitive to
estrogen and progesterone those those
are the cancer those those particular
kinds of so often when you you you you U
measure breast cancer you talk about you
know whether the the cells are estrogen
or progesterone sensitive I wanted to
talk about how our body stores energy
because I think that in part uh answers
a lot of these questions around around
um the things we're discussing about
weight loss about diet about all those
things we've talked about previously I
have a very loose understanding of this
so please enlighten me but I did go keto
for eight weeks and I lost so much
weight it's pretty crazy it bounce
straight back of course of course
because you're mostly lost water oh
really yeah that's one of the problems
with many diets so so fat is a is a fat
is a wonderful molecule right it's we we
tend to demonize it but it's fat is life
right fat is a really important molecule
so a fat is a is a a fat molecule has a
backbone of something called glycerol
glycerin right it's a three carbon
molecule there's a carbon carbon carbon
and there they little hydrogen sticking
off and to each one of those carbons is
a chain it sticks off a chain what's
called a fatty acid so so they're called
Tri glycerides they're Three fatty acids
on each glycerin and and there are
different kinds of fat fatty acids like
they're saturated fatty acids and
unsaturated fatty acids we can talk
about all those whatever but the point
is that these are each fatty acid stores
a huge amount of energy because those
long chains of carbon what our body does
is it Cleaves those carbons into smaller
units and gets and we get energy from
the from the bonds between those carbons
that's basically what our mitochondria
are doing right so fatty acids fats in
general have store a huge amount of
energy they store twice as much energy
as carbohydrates per unit Mass
so what we do is we we eat foods that
have fat in them or we eat carbohydrates
and our livers convert them quickly to
fats it's not it's it's easy right so
that's why you know fat-free diets don't
prevent people from being fat right
often with the help of insulin but it's
not the only hormone involved we then we
want to store those if you're not
burning them right our body can either
burn them or store them so if we're not
burning them I you we're running or
gesticulating talking Etc um um we we're
going to store them and we store them in
in special cells called adipocytes those
are the fat storing cells and our bodies
have billions of them you're born with
billions of these but you only have so
many adipocytes you get them when you're
young when you're born and that's it
that's the number of adipocytes you have
for the rest of your life and so and so
those adipocytes so insulin for example
helps potentiate the movement of
triglycerides
right which which you want to break down
and then you transport them into the fat
cell C and then you reassemble those
fats in the fat cell the glycerin and
the fatty acids you reassemble them in
the fat cell and they swell like a
balloon so every little fat cell in your
body is like a little balloon filled
with with fat and um and it's there to
be used and then there are hormones
which then help us retrieve that fat
when we need it right when we're running
a marathon or or just sitting around
talking and without having had lunch for
a while or whatever um and so you know
we we store fat we we then burn fat we
store fat we burn fat we store fat we
burn fat Etc and that's normal right and
as I as we talked about earlier in this
conversation humans evolved to have an
unusually high level of fat so a typical
Hunter gather male will have about 10 to
15% body fat typical Hunter female will
have about 15 to 25% body fat that's
normal sort of skinny human being that's
way more than most mammals right so
women had more women have more right so
women have a higher uh uh percentage of
body fat although actually women tend to
be smaller bodied so the total amount of
fat that men and women store is about
the same women of course if you think
about it um because they're involved in
they're the ones who have to pay for
reproduction directly either during
pregnancy or or nursing that fat is
especially important for reproduction
right so what happens is that that fat
is there and it's like a banket count
right it's energy that we store and
energy that we use and we store it in
different places most of the fat that we
store stores what we call subcutaneous
so underneath the skin
subcutaneous but we also store fat that
we call ectopic that's outside of where
it should be some of that fat is a lot
of that that ectopic fat is some of
that's in our liver we call that um so
people have a lot of so normal livers
have just a little bit of fat in them
but if you have too much fat in your
liver your liver starts to malfunction
it's called non-alcoholic fatty liver
syndrome you can have fat around your
kidneys that's what seid is right but
too much fat around your kidneys again
causes problems fatter around your heart
fatter around so any all that fat in
your in your in your abdomen that we
call that visceral fat viscera means
guts right so that gut fat is is is very
problematic and all because when those
fat cells get too big so if you store a
lot of fat Beyond those sort of normal
levels as the fat cells get bigger and
bigger and bigger just like any balloon
they start to
rupture so you know if you overfill a
water balloon it's going to break if you
overfill an hosy it's also going to
start break and when it starts to break
it attracts the immune system and the
immune system comes in white blood cells
come right they're they're they think
something's wrong you have a we have we
have damage here and they start to
produce
molecules that
trigger a a systemwide immune response
right and this and the fat cells
themselves also will trigger an immune
response the fat cells can produce the
same kinds of molecules that are white
blood cells produce so the white blood
cells are produce molecules called
cytokines cyto for cell right Kine for
you know enzymes that do something right
and and so the ones that fat cells
produce we call them
adipokines and like one adipokine that
produce is called is a TGF Alpha right
you may have heard of and that turns on
your it's like a it's like turns up the
dial on your on your on your
inflammatory system right and it goes
everywhere in your body and you start
getting inflammation right and that
inflammation for example if it's those
turn if if you have inflammation in your
your blood vessels then that
inflammation can help cause plaques to
form in your arteries if that
inflammation occurs in your brain those
can cause plaques in your brain that can
cause Alzheimer's if that inflammation
affects um uh receptor cells on muscles
Etc that can cause insulin resistance
which can cause diabetes and and the
list goes on right so that that chronic
inflammation which can be caused by too
many fat cells that are
overpacked essentially is is why too
much fat uh can can be can cause health
problems the keto diet and fasting they
someone said to me the other day that
keto is basically a form of fasting in a
way um and are they how do they help the
body because people are pretty crazy and
pretty keen on both fasting at the
moment but also the ketogenic diet well
fasting is when you go into negative
energy balance right which is how we
spent most of our sort of evolutionary
history right well you how you spend
part of every day right we we
eat after you eat you're in positive
energy balance and then when you in
between meals your energy balance goes
down right now you're a neg you're
burning now energy that you've stored
when you're asleep you're a negative
energy balance so fasting is just a
prolonged state of negative energy
balance right does that mean that it
would reduce my chance of getting cancer
could do people are are hoping that's
the case I don't know how good the data
are for intermittent fasting um because
if the Surplus and energy causes cancer
then me being in that negative energy
balance presumably will reduce my
chances of getting these right but then
you have to go back into positive energy
balance at some point too right you
can't keep up negative energy balance so
intermittent fasting isn't necessarily a
way to lose weight if you
eventually you know replace those
calories right so what you so here's a
hypothesis right to which I cannot um I
cannot prove but I think that you know
when you when you exercise right you're
also going to Nega negative energy
balance because you're burning energy
you're not eating while you're exercise
least most people aren't right and and
your and your body's turn you know
turning on all kinds of mechanisms to to
um to cope with that negative en energy
balance you're turning on all kinds of
repair and maintenance mechanisms when
you when you when you're go through
intermittent fasting you're basically
doing the same thing but less acutely
it's it's a more gradual level and I and
if you look at the at the at the genes
that are turned on by exercise and the
genes that are turned on by intermittent
fasting many of them are the very much
the same and I think it's because you're
basically turning on genes that are
responding to that negative energy
balance um but um but I would argue that
you're going to get more of a bang for
your buck by exercising than just going
through intermittent fasting both well a
bit too much yeah I mean intermittent
fasting might be a kind of a easy way to
get some of the bit bits of exercise
without exercising it might be I mean
obviously we went we you know there's
nothing necessarily wrong with
intermittent fasting but I'm not sure
that it has some of the huge benefits
that people claim now keto diets are a
little different right so keto diets are
when you're you're basically avoiding
any
carbohydrates and carbohydrates the the
basic building block of most sugars is
is glucose right glucose is the sort of
a simple form of sugar that are
basically in starches there there's some
other sugars fructos is also which which
is the kind of the sweet one but when
you basically stop taking in glucose
right you're now basically taking in
only fats and and so instead of using
glucose to fuel your brain and and other
cells in your body You're Now using
what's called Ketone bodies these are
these are essentially remember we talked
about how you when you break those fats
down into small little units those are
Ketone bodies U they um they can be used
as energy but um they're more of a kind
of a backup energy source for our bodies
than than the primary energy source so
we we use them um we T our bodies tend
to use them when we don't have glucose
available to us and does that mean the
same sort of repair and restore
mechanism kicks in potentially no I
don't think so because that's not
negative energy balance you're just
using an alternative fuel in this
particular point because a lot of
doctors have sort of prescribed a keto
diet for people that have like epileptic
seizures right and I don't think anybody
knows I'm not a neurologist but I don't
think anybody knows
why High Ketone diets are so
beneficial for epilepsy but it could be
that they do and I just don't know and
I'm that's not my it's not my subject
but anyway there's a there's a there's a
thought that if you just you know
essentially keep your insulin levels low
and rely on Ketone bodies instead of
glucose you can you know do all kinds of
miraculous things um for weight loss if
you look at the data yes it does tend to
uh lead to Rapid short-term weight loss
but the data don't s don't show it is
very effective as a a long-term weight
loss strategy and I think your your
example your own anecdotal account is is
sort of typical are we too coddled are
we cuddling our kids too much and
cuddling ourselves too much and is that
causing some of these mismatch
diseases well I'm not a psychiatrist or
a psychologist so uh physically cuddled
oh physically cuddled um stopping kids
from doing anything that might hurt them
or you know the risk aversion and yeah I
think so yeah I mean the Comfort
industry absolutely I mean you know I
have a whole chapter in my book on
Comfort right we have this idea that
Comfort is somehow good for you like
where does that come from right um
comfort is nice but you know I mean who
wouldn't rather be in business class
than in economy right but um but uh is a
comfortable shoe better for you right is
like is sitting in a chair better for
you than walking around or standing is
it better to take the stairs or take the
lift or the elevator um so Comfort isn't
necessarily good for us but when we but
we now want to live in a world where
we're able to have incredible levels of
comfort and um and it's definitely not
doing us some good because you know kids
need to run around I mean every kid
needs a good hour of physical activity a
day to build a healthy skeletal system
and to you know for for all the other
benefits that come from physical
activity so preventing our kids from
running around and doing physical
activity is definitely a problem is
there any evidence that our kids are
getting sort of physically weaker or
physically oh absolutely absolutely I
mean we have data in the United States I
mean we have this thing called the
Presidential Fitness Test right that was
started I think maybe it was Kennedy
started I can't some president a long
time ago
so we have decades worth of data and
kids today are are are less fit
absolutely uh any ask any army recruiter
they'll tell you that fewer and fewer
Army recruits are are physically fit and
able to be what about strong in terms of
Bones and our skeletal structures yeah I
mean the rates of osteoporosis are going
up and and one of the reasons for that
is that you know loading our skeleton
when we're growing up causes the
skeleton to to acrw mass to to grow bone
if you don't if you don't exercise right
and especially weightbearing forms of
exercise you don't grow as much skeleton
and then when you hit you know normally
people stop adding bone around 25 to 30
right so I don't know how old you are
but 31 all right so you're that's it you
have no more bone to add in the rest for
the rest of your life you're going to
start losing bone right but fortunately
you look like a reasonably fit person
who was very physically active so you
probably built up enough bone so having
a a high level of bone when you're
you're 25 when you're 25 to 30 as you
lose bone that's going to protect you
from falling below that threshold that's
going to give you osteoporosis but if
you aren't Physically Active when you're
young you have less bone to start with
you're still losing lose bone and you're
going to be much more likely to fall
below that threshold you're much more
likely to get osteoporosis and rates of
osteoporosis are rising again it's
another one of these mismatch diseases
that's Rising radically throughout the
world exercise also helps prevent uh
bone loss because it it it suppresses
the cells that that essentially cause
our bones to start being resorbed so so
it's a it's kind of a double whammy
you're not not enough exercise when
you're young you have less Peak bone
mass not enough exercise when you stay
old your bones are going to lose mass at
a more rapid rate I was reading in your
book that um teen tennis players can
become 40% thicker and stronger when
they become older because they were
using in in the arm that they use yeah
so so when you play tennis right the arm
that you use which is whacking the ball
that's getting more loading than the arm
that you simply use to throw the ball in
the air so there's an asymmetry so the
humorous the upper arm bone of tennis
players can be like 40% thicker than the
arm that they use to whack a tennis
roone just the bone yeah it's it's a
beautiful experiment you know natural
experiment in a body to show the
importance of loading that that loading
causes your your your skeleton to
respond because our skeletons are like
other tissues in our bodies respond to
Demand right we match capacity to demand
if you don't demand something of a
tissue it's not going to grow the
capacity because otherwise it's going to
be wasting energy right I know that
about muscles I knew that that muscles
grow and expand but I didn't think my
bones I had any say in the development
of my bones absolutely yeah loading your
bones is is is is is one of the factors
that just we talked about it earlier
that's why people who eat harder food
you know that's less processed grow
larger Jaws right our Jaws have shrunk
by about six% we showed by about 6%
since we started processing all our food
because we're just loading our our Jaws
L right that's another example is there
a consequence to this well so one
consequence is increased rates of
malocclusion right there's just not
enough room for our teeth uh to fit into
our Jaws so now we have to go we have to
go to the orthodonist to get our wisdom
teeth removed because there's not enough
space for them because okay so if I if I
just get my kid chewing hard food from
the jump then he his wisdom teeth will
be fine it might be the case yeah so so
so the experiment I'd like to see
somebody do of course it's unethical
right it would be to randomize two
groups of kids have one group of kids
basically chew really hard resinous gum
for like all their childhood right
because you're not going to get them to
eat like you know unprocessed Hunter
gather of food right but Mak we have
them chew gum all the time and then
compare them to say their twins who
don't chew um that much gum and let's
see who you know see you know see see
how much of an effect it has on their
jaw growth
puberty puberty um the age in which
women go through puberty has changed
quite significantly yeah and I couldn't
figure out why it's it's energy again
right it's always it's about energy
remember life is about energy taking an
energy and using that to reproduce so so
how much energy you have when you're
growing up affects the rate at which you
grow and the rate and the and your
ability to to switch from growth to
reproduction so we have data for example
from France there's good data from from
hundreds of years in France I'm not sure
why the French have such good
longitudinal data maybe it's because of
Napoleonic army or whatever but we can
show that you know 200 years ago French
girls were tending to go through puberty
they would start their menstrual you
know they went through what we call
menarchy when they start menstruating
around the age of 16 today it's around
12 12 and a half right and that's
because of more energy we see that in in
the area of Kenya where we do field work
right that we looking at the same
population kenian speaking people and
the in the rural areas where you know
they have hard lives right they're
they're working all day long there's no
machines there's no electricity there's
not a huge amount of food girls we go
through menarchy about 2 years later
than in the urban area just you know 50
km away where there's more food there's
more energy there's more Coca-Cola
there's more whatever um they and we
call that the secular Trend right so
that girls are maturing earlier they can
reproduce because again what does
natural selection want you to do wants
you to take in energy and use it to
reproduce that's what we're adapted for
so if you have more
energy we're we're evolved to to to do
it earlier every time I have these
conversations I realized that I'm sat in
a chair for a living for sometimes 3
hours at a time today I've been satting
this chair for about 7 hours and I go
[__] this is not going to be good for me
over the long term if I do this podcast
for the next 10 years maybe I should
just wrap it in here I mean it's been a
good run does it does it matter that I'm
spending so much time sitting down is
there any evidence that this is going to
you know have an adverse effect well so
the evidence is that um if you so people
who sit more um that can be an issue uh
there but there's two issues one is that
you look at the epidemiological data
what really matters is um Leisure Time
sitting versus work time sitting so
people who have who sit a lot at work
but then also sit a lot in their leisure
time when they're not at work they're
the ones who want run way more risk of
disease than people who are just sitting
a lot at work so that's one issue right
so so I think you're probably okay
because I'm I'm I can tell you you know
I I know that you're obviously very
Physically Active you work out Etc
that's that's going to help be very
protective but the other issue and I
think we talked about my in the previous
interview was sitting bout so so how
long you sit for a particular period is
also very important so we should be
getting up every 20 minutes you're going
to be interviewing Dave reand in a few
days so Dave Rin published one of my
favorite papers ever who showed that the
hza sit just as much as westerners they
sit about 10 hours a day um but they get
up all the time every if you're in a hza
camp you know there's Babies running
around they get up to get the babies
they're getting around to tend the fire
they're getting up all the time nobody
sits for a few hours and just like does
what you and I are doing and when you
get up you're kind of turning on the
metabolism of your body you're turning
on your muscles it's like turning on the
car engine right you're you're you're
kind of Awakening all kinds of metabolic
processes and that seems to have a huge
amount of benefit so the key is if
you're going to sit get up a lot right
go get up go go pee make a cup of tea
whatever you know interrupt your sitting
a lot I'll be right
back and of course if you're going to
sit at work make sure that you're not
spending you know sitting in your car to
get to work isn't good and then you go
home and you sit on the couch and watch
television that's not good um so you
know make sure that those non-work
periods of time are um don't involve too
much sitting is that why we've got so
many of these random pains joint pains
you know we were talking about you said
back pain is the what you say it's the
number one medical complaint in the
world yeah back
pain and that surely is because of the
way we've designed our chairs and our
lives well part of that is also just
back strength so you know I'm sitting in
this lovely comfortable chair here and
I'm resting my back against it I don't
have to use any of the back muscles
right so we we de we develop weak backs
that don't have any endurance so they're
quickly fatigable right so and actually
the best predictor of whether somebody
gets back pain is how strong their backs
are and not just like uh like you know
acute strength like from doing you know
like one thing it's it's how how how how
how much endurance their back muscles
have because because just think about it
like I don't know you but like every
once in a while I get a back pain right
I bend over to pick up a pencil or
something like that and I think ah it
was picking up the pencil right but
that's just the straw that literally
broke the camel's back right it's it's
really the fact that I just it just
happened to be the the event that
triggered it but it's when my back is
weak right that I'm just more likely to
do something a little bit weird and then
trigger something that causes a spasm
right but having um a strong back
muscles
is the way really to prevent back pain
if someone's just heard everything
you've said about these mismatch
diseases there's a lot to take in you
know there's a lot of different mismatch
diseases you said that if you're going
to die from anything it's basically
going to be one of these mismatch
diseases is there a conclus conclusion
is there an actionable conclusion about
something maybe that I can change or do
today or is there there a philosophy you
can lend me that is going to reduce my
chances of getting one of these mismatch
diseases just like a broader philosophy
towards life
yes I well two I think there's two the
first is that understanding why we get
particular kinds of mismatches helps us
make decisions about how to use our
bodies right what to eat how to be
physically active how to sit I mean all
the things we've been talking about
result in action items right let's get
up more often right let's not eat sugary
fatty foods so often right let's you
know let's try to avoid psychosocial
stress which is you can't just you know
wave a magic wand and do that that's a
hard one but we think that our life is
normal we think it's normal to live the
kinds of you know everybody thinks their
nor life is normal right we think the
foods that we eat are normal the kinds
of physical activities that we do are
normal the clothes that we wear the
shoes that we wear are normal cars cars
all of that right and but um from an
evolutionary perspective they're not
normal that doesn't mean they're not
good or or that they're necessarily bad
right but but it it gives us a chance to
pause and think and ask you know do we
have to live with this right or or how
can we modify the way we use cars and
taxis and shoes and you know we can
don't have to get rid of shoes but maybe
we'd be better off with more minimal
shoes especially for our kids maybe we'd
be better off without you know processed
foods that are have all the fiber you
know removed and all that you know that
fat and sugar added and all kinds of
other crap right again let's not engage
in a Paleo fantasy and pretend that
hunter gatherers don't get sick or that
you know Hunter gather you know what if
eating like a hunter gather will make
you you know absolutely healthy that's
not the way it works but we have
information that we can learn from our
evolutionary history that helps us make
better decisions so that's point one and
point two is that we need to be really
aware of this vicious cycle that we've
created in our modern world whereby
treating the symptoms of these mismatch
diseases are actually driving forward
the system and making things worse
there's a reason that heart disease is
going up in the world there's a reason
that diabetes is going up in the world
there's a reason that myopia is going up
in the world right it's because we're
we're we're creating novel environments
for which our bodies are poorly or
inadequately adapted and then instead of
preventing those causes we're simply
when we can treating the symptoms and
and so we're not stopping that you know
the the fundamental problem from
occurring and and thinking about it that
way from a kind of modern sort of
cultural evolutionary perspective it's
not a form of natural selection it's a
kind of cultural evolution that's going
on but it's cultural Evolution that's
affecting our bodies and thinking about
that vicious cycle that we've created
can help us stop the viscious
cycle as you'll know if you've listened
to this podcast before I'm an investor
in a company called hu I'm on their
board and they sponsor this podcast
Daily Greens which is this powder I have
in front of me for those of you that can
see that gives you some incredible
health benefits your energy your
concentration your immunity is now
available in the UK for the 91 vitamins
and minerals you get from it the
adaptogens the daily green probiotics
that are within this blend and for the
last year or so all of you on this
podcast that have dm'd me about this
product have asked when it will be
coming to the UK it's now here if you're
someone that wants to get more greens
into your diet then I highly recommend
giving it a go not only is it good for
you but it tastes good win-win the
product was so popular in the US that it
sold out over and over again and I think
that's what's going to happen here in
the UK so get your hands on it now just
give it a try take a picture tag me DM
me let me know what you think of it um
because I think it's going to become one
of your staple products if you're
someone that's looking for a greens
product in your life then I really
believe that this will probably become
your staple as it has become mine thank
you so much Daniel I as you were
speaking I was just thinking about
something we haven't discussed but that
is front of mine for me at the moment
which is the Cosmetic products that are
in my life I spray all this geant on my
pores and I put all this these chemicals
on me and there's a whole industry that
are telling you to rub these creams into
your face and all of this stuff and
alcohol in your mouth with mouth
mouthwash and over the last three months
since we last saw each other I have
really started to rethink about all
these chemicals that I just assumed were
all meant to like throw down our mouths
up our nose and you know what I'm saying
yeah is there anything that you've
learned that any advice I need on that
stuff just be skeptical skeptical I mean
look there's an entire world of people
out there who's trying who are trying to
sell us stuff right and and if you're
particularly like you you're you're
you're you're you're clearly interested
in how to live your life better right so
I think you're especially vulnerable to
people with the latest big idea the
latest new product because you're you're
a Seeker right you're you're looking for
this stuff right so you're you they've
got you you're in their target right and
um you're you're I think more vulnerable
so I think being skeptical now it
doesn't mean that all products are bad
for you but but probably the most of
most of them are right or Le they're not
going to do much benefit and there could
be be unended consequences everything
has trade-offs right when you take some
mouthwash right and kill the bacteria in
your mouth most of the bacteria they're
killing probably are useful right your
microbiome you have an oral microbiome a
lot of that's good for you right um and
it may have a short-term benefit of
maybe making your breaths feel a little
bit better but but it may have a
long-term cost I don't know I'm not an
expert on the or out anyway because that
was one of the things I looked at I
thought okay so I've qu alcohol I don't
drink anymore but this mouthwash that
I'm having is got all this alcohol in
and I'm I'm throwing it in my mouth
every day which is killing all the um
the good bugs in my gut microbiome and
also even on our hands we've because of
covid we got into this culture of
sanitizing all the bugs off our hands
and it was quite scary because I I think
again through this lens of like what is
the more natural way to live and this
constant sanitizing of our hands and our
children's hands and this fear of bugs
my girlfriend comes back from the gym
and she rushes into the house and
lathers on all this antibiotic CU she's
been touching things other people have
been touching I you know when I go to
the gym I do that too but yes too I yeah
but look you've heard of the hygiene
hypothesis right this is so we you know
you have the same immune system I have
the same immune system as our great
great great great great grandparents
right our immune systems you know we all
have these these really amazing immune
systems that evolved protect us from all
those germs and worms out there right
this is something I talk about in the
book too now in this highly sanitized
world I still have the same immune
system but now it's like it's like
doesn't have anything to do right the
analogy I use it's like it's like a
bunch of teenagers hanging out on the
corner with nothing to do it's much more
likely to get into trouble right and so
people who who grow up especially in
more sanitized environments with
dishwashers without you know pets
without animals Etc are much more likely
to develop allergies and various kinds
of autoimmune diseases because their
immune systems are no longer busy
defending them from the normal pathogens
that are out there in the in in the
world that we evolved to live in and now
we still have the same immune system and
now you know they're like those
teenagers on the corner they have
nothing to do and they're M that
increases the probability that they
start to attack us so that's why peanut
allergies and various kinds of allergies
and milk allergies and what all these
allergies are up on the rise because our
immune systems are so unchallenged they
they they basically end up um
accidentally attacking us because they
have no pathogens to deal with um that's
true true of of a wide range of
autoimmune diseases and so uh so so so
being Ultra Ultra sterile environments
we you know we think it's like the great
but actually and during a pandemic you
know it's can actually prevent you from
getting an infectious disease but but it
also has has costs and like it'll be
interesting to see like all those kids
who were born during the pandemic who
who didn't um interact with other kids
that much you know Nur nursery school or
play school or whatever who are wearing
masks all the time wearing you know get
getting all those creams you know those
antibiotic creams it's you know um stuff
they they might be more likely to get
autoimmune diseases we'll see as they
grow up what happens to
them Daniel thank you so much all of
your books are absolutely fascinating
it's so bloody annoying because I could
just talk to you forever they're so
brilliant all of the books absolutely
brilliant and um I had so many calls
after our last conversation which I
think has almost got 10 million
downloads which is crazy because feels
like it was a couple of weeks ago from
friends of mine I got a particularly
hilarious call from a lady called deina
mcco who is uh she's been a TV presenter
in the UK she's one of the most famous
people on TV in the UK for 25 years and
she called me at 7 a.m. right and she
calls me at 7: a.m. she go Stephen I've
just listened to the podcast with Daniel
Ean she I'm running she was and she was
like get out of my way she's getting
people out of my way and she's running
down on the
street well I'm very honored thank you
um but I had so many phone calls like
that and so many conversations like that
because of that um conversation and this
book is just
gosh the story of the human body it is
essential reading and as I've heard it's
being used in schools and education um
institutions so I do hope that you
continue to evolve and update the book
with new science ASM when it comes um
because it's such an important book
thank you again for the generosity of
giving me your time it's a huge huge
honor and I say that uh I don't say that
lightly we have a closing tradition on
this podcast where the last guest leaves
a question for the next guest you know
the tradition
okay ah the question left for you is for
what would you be willing to die
today that's a very hard
one um I mean obviously you know it's a
it's
a I think we all think about that
occasionally right um I would um if it
need be I think for the people I really
love and care about right for my my
daughter my wife um and I think I would
um I would certainly um be willing to
risk uh dying you know if it really had
an enormous benefit for for humankind it
would not be an easy decision to make
and I've never been put into that
position so it's all
theoretical uh I think you wouldn't know
the answer until you had to make that
decision at the moment would you die for
an
idea I don't think so but I don't
know interesting but ideas can be
powerful and
important Daniel thank that's a tough
one it's really tough and I'm just going
to give it away a little bit here but
this is what part of what we were
discussing with the previous guest that
was on the show and he asked me this
question he asked me what I would die
for and what I die for an idea Etc
and and so I said I'd Die For my
siblings and my partner my romantic
partner for some reason I said I
wouldn't die for my parents but I think
it's purely because I think it makes
more sense for me to reproduce and have
all the kids I'm gonna have um and he
asked if I would die for an idea and as
he left I thought about it more and if
you're saying the idea of quality or uh
you know these big ideas that would save
lots of people's lives from suffering I
think there I would die for an idea I he
said would you die for your country as
well which is an interesting one yeah it
depends what the consequence would be if
I didn't one can have these thoughts you
can think about it in the abstract but
it's totally different when the actual
when you're actually confronted with
with a decision and what I don't know is
whether or not what I just said would
actually be the case in the moment and
that's why when he said would you die
for your country I felt like I can't
answer that it would be disrespectful
for those that that are dying for their
my my country right now yeah but people
do yeah and people do and I for me to
just sit here in this podcasting chair
in this hot studio and go yeah of course
I would but I'm absolutely not doing
that if they hadn't we might not be here
today that's true Daniel thank you my
pleasure thank
you do you need a podcast to listen to
next we've discovered that people who
liked this episode also tend to
absolutely love another recent episode
we've done so I've linked that episode
in the description deson below I know
you'll enjoy
[Music]
it